the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so collective knowledge got us a bunch
more points
so these are the rules for significant
figures are on the back page of a
handout from Friday and so we want to
think about how many are after the
decimal point here so they're three
after the decimal point which gives you
three here in your answer log
significant figure rules yes
so in acid base and some and chemical
equilibrium which are all kind of the
same thing you can have subtraction and
addition then multiplication and
division and then end your answer with
logs three significant figures in one
problem yes it's coming so I want to get
get those get those rules down okay
so today we're going to talk about
solubility and this is really a direct
kind of growth out of thermodynamics and
chemical equilibrium you're going to be
seeing a lot of the same ideas in
solubility and then at the end of class
we're going to start acid bases okay so
so far we have been discussing mostly
pure substances and that is all changing
right now because most substances are
actually mixtures so most the time you
have two things mixed together so
mixtures you have a homogeneous mixture
of something something's dissolved in
something else and and you have a
solution is a homogeneous mixture and so
in your solution you have a solvent
which is the thing that is dissolving
the other thing and the other thing is
the solute so the solute is any
dissolved substance in a solution and
the solvent is the substitute that does
the dissolving and water is a great
solvent one of the most common solvents
is water so when you have your solute in
your solvent and it's nicely dissolved
then you have a solution so let's look
at examples of things that dissolve
other things and first we're going to
talk about NaCl common table salt
dissolving in water so any cialis held
together by an ionic bond and it forms
crystals where we have these beautiful
arrangement of our sodium plus and our
CL minus and a polar solvent like water
will what's called hydrate the ions and
pry them away from the surface so if we
look at this picture and we have our
sodium and our chlorides around it in
our salt crystal we have water which is
red with those two little white dots
which are the hydrogen's on the water
and so we have our bent geometry for our
polar water molecule and the water is
coming in and it's hydrating the ions
and so here you see the edge of the salt
crystal and now the water is kind of
pulling one of the the ions apart and
here you see the ions are coming out of
the salt crystal and dissolving in your
solution so a polar solvent like water
can just pry that crystal apart so
stirring can speed up this process it
doesn't often change the properties it
doesn't make things more soluble but
it'll speed it up because if you stir it
you're going to get more of that water
having access to the edges of the salt
crystals and helping to to pry apart and
hydrate those ions so that they soluble
eyes we have an equilibrium expression
for solubility so we're just following
right along with chemical equilibrium
and so we have our solid NaCl going to
our hydrated ions our na plus that was
pulled out by water and our CL minus and
this in here it says aqueous
abbreviation from aqueous so we have our
dissolved ions that's how we would
interpret that and s here is for solid
so we've also not paid much attention to
phase of things at this point a little
bit when we're talking about increasing
entropy we are talking about gases going
to liquids and solids and vice-versa and
predicting the change in
in entropy for those processes but now
we're going to spend a lot of time
paying attention to the phase and so
solubility something solid going to its
aqueous ions so we can write an
equilibrium expression for this and it
has a special name
KSP where s P stands for solubility
product and so KSP would be equal to the
concentration of sodium ions and the
concentration of Klerk times the
concentration of chloride ions and it's
an equilibrium constants are products
over reactants we don't have our
reactant in this equation because it is
a solid so it doesn't appear in the
equilibrium expression so our equal is
our an expression which here has the
special name of KSP is just those ions
in solution the concentration of each
ion times each other alright so let's
have a little practice with writing KS
peas and so we have a clicker question
on that
all right ten more seconds
great yep so again we don't want to have
the solid in the expression and we need
to remember the stochiometry always need
to remember the Skokie amma tree okay so
their solubility product okay so now
let's think about something that is not
ionic let's think about glucose we've
talked a lot about glucose let's think
about glucose dissolving in water and
here I have a picture of two beakers a
beaker where it's clear and a beaker
rare there's a lot of glucose sitting on
the bottom and so we can think about the
solubility here so how can this dissolve
it can't form ions is not made up of
ions like sodium chloride so how does it
dissolve well it can dissolve again
water molecules water is amazing water
molecules form hydrogen bonds with the
glucose and pull one of the glucose
molecules that it's at the edge of the
solid piece of glucose pulls it out into
solution by hydrogen bonding to it so
again it's soluble izing the glucose
that's in this solid form by interacting
at the surface and prying layers of
glucose molecules off by hydrogen
bonding to them luckily you know all
about hydrogen bonds so just to do a
little clicker practice why don't you
tell me what kind of hydrogen bonds
glucose is capable of forming if it is
in fact capable of forming but I kind of
gave away one of the answers here
ten more seconds
all right good and zero put four that's
awesome you are listening to what I was
saying yes so that is correct and if we
look back at the molecule for a minute
so it's a hydrogen bond donor because of
these Oh H groups all along here and so
Oh H there's an electron negativity
difference a greater than point four so
it's capable of being a hydrogen bond
donor but this double bonded oh here
it's not a complete lewis structure it's
missing its lone pairs but it has lone
pairs on that oxygen and that could be a
hydrogen bond acceptor so we have
hydrogen bond donors and hydrogen-bond
acceptors in this molecule and water can
also be a hydrogen bond donor and
acceptor it has to hide two hydrogen's
that can form hydrogen bond and also has
two lone pairs which gives it it's bent
shape so it can be a donor and acceptor
so it's capable of interacting with
glucose and pulling that solid glucose
into solution so if we look at these two
pictures this could be glucose nicely in
solution you can't see any glucose but
here you see a level of glucose at the
bottom and a solution is considered
saturated when all of the solvent has
dissolved as much as it can but a little
bit of undissolved solute remains so
this this is not really this is over
saturated often it's just saturated when
you have just a little bit more than can
be dissolved you've gone past that point
you can't get any more dissolved in that
volume of water this has a pretty large
excess so sometimes when you're you get
your solution you get your solution
clear your glucose has dissolved or
whatever it is you're working on has
dissolved and then you maybe add a
little bit too much and it all crashes
out a solution again you have the
precipitant just coming out so
undissolved solute another name for that
the name that's used more often is
precipitate so it precipitates out of
solution if it has too much in it so if
you are not part
of the solution you are part of the
precipitate
that's my t-shirt okay so dissolves and
undissolved solute they're not doing
nothing they're in dynamic equilibrium
just like all other kind of chemical
equilibrium there's no net change but
the process is still going forward and
back in fact the rate going forward is
equal to the rate going back the same is
true here the dissolved and undissolved
to solute are in dynamic equilibrium
with each other so how much can you get
in there
how much solute can you get into your
solvent and that depends on the
particular substance and its molar
solubility and molar solubility is
defined as s either little s or big as I
seen it both ways in textbooks so the
molar solubility s is the molar
concentration in that saturated solution
where you've put just a little more in
than can be completely dissolved and so
that represents the limit of the ability
of that solvent to dissolve that solute
that particular compound and it's units
are perhaps unsurprisingly given its
name is molar moles per liter so molar
solubility is related to our friend KSP
but it's not the same thing or at least
most of the time I think none of the
time exactly the same so when you're
talking about the molar solubility of
either ion you're talking about that
concentration of sodium plus or chlorine
minus so you're talking about the moles
per liter that can be dissolved in that
particular amount of solvent or kind of
solvent and so those concentrations are
the molar solubility and again our KSP
is going to be equal to the
concentration of the sodium in solution
and the concentration of that chloride
that's dissolved so in this case
the relationship is that KSP would equal
the molar solubility squared the molar
solubility of this times the molar
solubility of that so you can derive if
you know one you can drive the other and
you can do that on a problem set in
particular so those are the definitions
of those terms so molar solubility how
much is something dissolves in another
whether it dissolves it all will depend
on again the nature of the material and
the nature of the solvent
are they miscible do they is there a way
like water getting in there and forming
hydrogen bonds for example and this
leads to a rule that a lot of people
tend to know which is like dissolves
like rule so if water if it's a non
ionic substance and you need to pull it
out of the solid by hydrogen bonding if
that material is nothing to hydrogen
bond to if it's completely non polar
water is not going to be able to soluble
eyes it so polar things polar liquids
like water are generally the best
solvents for things that are ionic like
salts or polar compounds so it doesn't
have to be a salt it can be a compound
made of carbon but it needs to be a
polar compound so that the water can get
in there and form those hydrogen bonds
so you can see that knowing what is
capable of forming hydrogen bonds can be
really useful to think about what's
going to be dissolved in what other type
of material so nonpolar liquids like
hexane for example or better for
nonpolar so nonpolar like dissolves
likes and so that's why people go to dry
cleaners because you know you don't you
don't want to use water to wash certain
things you want to use you want to be
dry you want to get your nonpolar stains
out so this is very important there's a
number of applications of these
principles this is important in the
pharmaceutical industry so we talked
about some of the molecules that are
used as pharmaceutical in terms of being
polar or not
polar and vitamins the same way so when
you're designing a molecule that you
want to get into the body and react with
the target if you design something that
is really nonpolar it's not the human
body there's a lot of water parts and
it's not going to necessarily get to
where you want it to go and but if it's
too too nonpolar or to polar it might
just get washed out so you want the
right amount of polar nonpolar to stay
in the body long enough but also get to
where it needs to go so a lot of people
who are designing molecules to treat
disease are very concerned about can we
make this molecule more polar can we
make it more soluble it's a great it
hits our target beautifully it really
destroys that enzyme it would be a
fantastic chemo therapeutic agent but we
need to figure out how to make it get
into the cell but it needs to target and
of course so if you're gonna go into
drug design or medicine you care about
this if you're gonna become a parent you
care a lot about cleaning and you become
you know it's a daily event how am I
going to get this stain out of my
child's clothes every day this is a
question so this is important all right
and one one other example in the lungs
of cleaning I just want to share with
you a short story about a chemist Robert
H black and a life altering event that
happened to him so one day mrs. black
said to mr. black clean the bathtub this
was an unprecedented event in the black
household so Robert black went in to
clean his bathtub and it was really hard
and he scrubbed any scrubbed and
scrubbed any scrubbed and he was a
chemist so he knew what kind of
chemicals you would need to to clean a
bathtub you want to have things to
dissolve your like sand you know so you
want to have your polar and nonpolar you
want to have a chelating agent to pull
the heavy metals out of the tub scum as
surfactant to make them beat up so you
can wash them away alcohols to remove
sort of the more greasy kind of
so he knew all this but he realized that
if you didn't apply cleaner on a regular
basis the tub scum got so thick and so
nasty that the cleaner couldn't
penetrate the scum and you need surface
area these things work by dissolving out
they touch the surface so you need to
have a surface so he had this idea then
instead of having this tub scum build up
so much that it was a real problem to
clean it that you could take all of
these things that were chemists knew
would be useful and package them in
something that was a daily cleaner so he
advertised these things that every time
you take a shower you just spray the
shower or the tub and then you never
have to scrub your tub again because you
do a little bit every day where there's
not a lot of surface so it gets it right
off right away and mr. black and his
wife never had to clean their tub again
because this resulted in sales of about
70 million dollars per year and it's
important to point out that he wasn't
using anything new
he was just packaging his chemicals for
daily use rather than say for weekly or
monthly use so I think there's a couple
important lessons from this one it's
always important to clean your bathroom
too you never know where chemistry
knowledge is going to come what
life-altering event will cause you to
realize that you have in your mind
chemistry knowledge that can make you
seventy million dollars a year and when
that life-altering event occurs remember
that I take cash and checks and stock
options I added the last one I thought
cashing checks I should be more flexible
so I'm also going to take stock options
and this is why I teach you all the
fundamentals of chemistry cover
everything that's really important for
you to know because then if you use any
of it you've learned it for me okay
so just keep that in mind one never
knows what life event is ahead of you
what about gas solubility we talked
about solids now let's talk about gases
so whether a gas is going to be soluble
is going to depend on Henry's law or we
can find out about its solubility so the
solubility of a gas we're going to call
that little s that's our solubility is
directly proportional to the partial
pressure of the gas and a constant
called Henry's constant and that depends
on the nature of the gas and the solvent
and the temperature so let's think about
this this rule in this plot in a clicker
question
all right just take 10 more seconds
awesome that is correct okay so let's
just take a look at that so one of one
of the clicker questions was just kind
of getting you to read the graph and so
it was asking say at point 5 atmospheres
it said oxygen is more soluble than
helium
this is molar solubility versus partial
pressure at point five sure enough
oxygen is more soluble so that was just
reading the plot the other one was just
interpreting henry's law again that
solubility if solubility would increase
his partial pressure increases you can
see that from the equation but you can
also think about why that's true and why
it's true is the answer to three that
the solubility of gas is proportional to
its partial pressure an increase in
pressure corresponds to an increase in
rate at which the gas molecules strike
the surface and that makes them more
soluble so again solubility really has
to do with getting at that surface if
you get at the surface then you can
dissolve your material all right so why
should you care about the solubility of
gases and I'm gonna give you an example
this is another in your own word so
we'll watch the video and I think
tonight there's some kind of big climate
change thing I've seen fliers around I
haven't paid enough attention to what's
going on but climate change is certainly
a very hot topic if you'll excuse that
right now I didn't really mean it it
just kind of came out but co2 is a
greenhouse gas it's a big problem and so
a number of researchers here at MIT are
thinking about ways that you can capture
and store it somewhere get it out of our
atmosphere other people are thinking
about ways that you can change
industrial processes to make less co2
there's a lot of research going on so
today you'll hear from Hector Hernandez
who had a PhD in chemistry from the
chemistry department here at MIT did his
postdoc here at MIT in chemical
engineering and is now a professor of
chemical engineering
Masdar Institute in the United Arab
Emirates so this is one of the MIT
satellite universities that are popping
up all over the world so Hector was born
I think in Honduras and then lived in
Florida ended up in MIT and now he's at
the United Arab Emirates so that's just
another example of one never knows
what's going to happen to you all right
so you can hear from Hector in his own
words so another there's Hector's video
is is on personal videos online I think
it's a fun one to watch there's a couple
things that are really interesting about
his personal story including the fact
that as he mentioned in past life he did
some construction he started undergrad
at aged aged 30 I think where he was he
was basically building houses and fixing
cars and he realized that his back might
not survive this being his permanent
career so he decided to use his brain
instead of his back and so start an
undergraduate now he's a professor so it
just shows there's a lot of different
paths to success all right so co2 big
problem you were trying to use and in
that case he was interested in trying to
biofuels they're interested in ways to
store it you care about solubility of
gases and you care about lechatelier's
principle of driving things the
direction that you want to make the
products you want okay so let's think
more about these factors that affect
solubility and one thing that's very
important for sure is temperature so
temperature most substances dissolve
more quickly at higher temperature which
is often what you want but it doesn't
always mean if you increase the
temperature that you're going to make it
more soluble you may just make it
dissolve faster but not actually change
the end product some things are more
sensitive to temperature than others so
most gases for example are less soluble
in warm water than in cold water but
with solids it's much harder to predict
that what effect temperature might have
on their solubility even though for many
things it will make it faster so let's
think now about how to drive a reaction
and what what what factors are involved
and what's favorable and what's not
favorable and when we're talking about
those things we're going to be back to
our thermodynamics back to enthalpy
entropy and Gibbs free energy so all
these have little special sub names so
when we're talking about Delta H and
we're talking about solutions things
dissolving we're talking about Delta H
sub salt for salt solution or if you
could think of it as solubility and one
point that I'll make a lot of times when
people are learning a new field they're
like oh there's so much to learn but it
you get to some point everything is just
kind of like a subtle difference in
something you've already learned so if
you already learned about Delta H this
is just a slight modification of what
you learned it's not you don't have to
learn a whole new thing so that's one of
the good things about the course you
start recognizing already I already
pretty much know know this I just need
to add a little salt to the end ok so
Delta H of solution can be measured you
can measure it from heat released when
something dissolves or measure it by the
heat absorbed and at constant pressure
and so the sine of Delta H Sol will tell
you about whether heat is released or
heat is required when something
dissolves so a negative enthalpy of
solution tells us that heat is released
when something dissolves and many of you
may have just experienced this if you're
holding you're mixing something together
and you're holding the container and all
of a sudden it heats up so then you know
Delta H of saule is a negative value and
of course a positive value tells you
that that energy is absorbed and
sometimes things can get very very cold
when they're dissolving so you already
kind of knew that that negative
delta h tells you that heat is released
and positive delta h tells you that heat
is absorbed so this is basically the
same thing that you already learned it
just applies two things to solving just
the same as it does to any reaction all
right now suppose we want to know
whether the reaction is going to be
spontaneous at constant pressure or
temperature if you want to know if the
dissolving whether it will dissolve
spontaneously what am i asking about
what term do I want to know I want to
know about Delta G I sure do
Delta G tells us whether things are
spontaneous or not it does with
thermodynamics it does with solubility
Delta G is the predictor of whether
something is going to be spontaneous or
non-spontaneous by the sign of Delta G
so entropy don't want to leave out
entropy never leave out entropy my
t-shirts still unaccounted for after
they got back to Massachusetts they left
for New Jersey and Cincinnati again last
time I checked they were still in Ohio
entropy all right so since disorder
typically increases when a solvent
dissolves typically entropy should
increase and there's a little star and
we'll get back to the star because
doesn't always increase but typically it
should increase so if we're looking at
these pictures here over here you have
your nice molecules all lined up in your
solvent and your solid and it's going to
then dissolve and you can see that when
it's dissolved that's a lot more entropy
over there there are a lot more freedom
moving around this is more constrained
so typically entropy increases when
things dissolve so if Delta H is
negative and Delta s increases when a
solute dissolves then what do we expect
about the dissolving process and that's
a clicker question
yeah so most people have so we'll take
10 more seconds
so let's look at both of them because
we're gonna do this one in a few minutes
so let's let's just continue with our
notes and we're gonna come back to that
one I don't know if we just leave that
one up maybe for a minute I don't know
how long it was gonna take to me to get
there all right so when we're talking
about this oops
so if we'll just keep things in the
notes and we'll come back to that one so
the if this is if this is negative and
Delta s is increasing so if this is
negative and this is positive then
you're going to have a spontaneous
process here so if you can put in your
notes that this should be spontaneous
under these circumstances all right so
now let's continue on and think about
getting around to the next one so in
some cases I don't know hopefully if
people can see this in some cases
entropy of the system is actually
lowered when something dissolves and
this is because of what's known as this
cage effect if you have water molecules
when something dissolves sometimes order
around the thing and so the water
entropy is determining the process and
so it's it's it's you have this new
order because of the water structure so
this can change so it's not always the
case that entropy of the overall system
is going to increase so here even if
this is a negative value Delta H
solution is negative Delta G might be
positive it might not be a spontaneous
system and so the cage effect is why
some things that are hydrophobic you
just you're having a hard time
dissolving them even if they have a
negative enthalpy even if you would just
look at the negative enthalpy and
predict that it should be spontaneous
because even if this is negative this is
negative if Delta s is also negative
because you have more order due to the
water molecules then the overall term
can be positive it would depend on the
mass
magnitude of of these and of the
temperature so then this is actually
more slides than I remembered before we
get to the next cut oh this is the last
one okay so when gases are in liquids
dissolved in a liquid there's much less
freedom gases not dissolved can be
anywhere but when they're in a liquid
then there's much less freedom and so
the entropy then is going to be negative
and the solubility will decrease as the
temperature rises and so that brings us
then to our question about Delta H of
solution being positive and now we can
look at the answer to that ok so now I
guess we can go maybe to the other slide
so that was the question that you had
here and I've just put up the answers so
here Delta H is positive and so we have
positive minus T Delta s again we don't
it we weren't told anything about Delta
s in this particular just asked what if
it's positive and so one for the first
one said dissolving is never spontaneous
and that isn't necessarily true because
you don't know what Delta s is
dissolving is only spontaneous if T
Delta s is positive and larger than
Delta H solution and that was the
correct answer if this is a big term
here it's larger than that term and this
is a positive value then you would get a
negative Delta G and it would be a
spontaneous process if we look at number
three here dissolving is only
spontaneous if this is negative that
does not help us and at all and the rate
will be slower Delta H is not going to
tell us anything about rates rates are
determined by kinetics temperature can
affect the rates for sure stirring can
affect the rates for sure but Delta H is
not telling us about being tailed Delta
H being
positive it's not telling us about the
raids so you'll see in this in this
particular unit when you're thinking
about solubility you're thinking about
equilibrium expressions a special
equilibrium expression KSP you're
thinking about partial pressures again
you're thinking about effects on the
solubility that have to do with
temperatures you're thinking about Delta
H Delta s and Delta G so it's really an
outgrowth of thermodynamics and chemical
equilibrium but you're just applying
really what you've already learned to
thinking about a solute dissolving in a
solvent so that's one of the things
that's really great about the course and
the next couple units is that
everything's very connected so we can
just briefly introduce you to the next
unit and we're going to be talking about
acids and bases now for several lectures
and I have to say that this is one of
the unit's when we get to kind of
acid-base titrations that MIT students
seem to struggle with so we're gonna
spend we're gonna slow this down and
really go over it and have you be
awesome at acids and bases alright so
and I'll mention that one of the reasons
why I spend time on solubility and acids
bases because these are topics that are
really important for medical school and
I know a lot of you are not pre-med but
I want everybody in this class to have
that background that they could go to
med school if they wanted to or they
could just advocate for their own health
with a doctor who doesn't know about
acids and bases and I'll tell you a
story about that a little later
anyway okay so acids and bases we're
just going to do some definitions so the
simplest definition of this is that an
acid is a substance that when dissolved
in water increases the concentration of
hydrogen ions h+ where as a base is a
substance that increases
the hydroxide concentration Oh h- so
they're acids and bases that definitely
fit this description but this is a very
narrow description of acids and bases
the next one the bronsted-lowry is a bit
broader so an acid is something that
donates a hydrogen ion H+ and a
bronsted-lowry base is something that
accepts a hydrogen ion and this is
really the definition we'll be spending
the most time with in the class so let's
look at some examples of this so here we
have an acid and if it's an acid it's
going to be donating a hydrogen ion and
it's going to donate it here to the
water the water acts as a base in that
it accepts the hydrogen ion when it
accepts the hydrogen ion it has one
extra hydrogen ion so it's h3o plus and
when the acid loses its hydrogen ion it
becomes this base over here the same
molecule - the hydrogen ion so now it
has a negative charge and so this where
you'll see hydronium ions quite a bit
which is h3o plus that's really the more
accurate form rather than just writing
h+ somewhere so that's the kind of true
nature of things so let me just show you
a little animation of this happening I
think it's kind of cute
so here we have our water molecules and
we have our acid it would donated a
hydrogen ion to these and then another
water came and stole it away and so
there's our h3o plus and so in solution
you have this exchange of hydrogen atoms
the acid is donating the base is
accepting and as they donate and accept
they become different molecules so that
gives rise to this idea of conjugate
acid-base pairs so here you see
that this acid is paired with this base
over here they're the same except that
one has the hydrogen ion and one does
not and then the other pair is here it's
a it's another acid-base pair we have
water and hydronium ion that also differ
by H+ so every time an acid donates a
hydrogen ion or proton it becomes its
conjugate base every time a base accepts
a hydrogen ion or proton it becomes its
conjugate acid so the conjugate base of
any acid is the base that is formed when
the acid acid has donated a hydrogen ion
or proton the conjugate acid of a base
is the acid that forms when the base
accepts a hydrogen ion or proton so
let's take a look at one more example if
this over here is this acting as an acid
or base this molecule here what do you
think you can just yell it out it's
acting as an acid right this is acting
then as the base when this base accepts
the hydrogen ion it forms its conjugate
acid and this then forms its conjugate
base which differs by H+ so why don't
you why don't you try one of these then
on your own
ten more seconds
okay so we can go back to that over
there
so you most people got this this right
and so you're looking at what's acting
as the base and what's acting as the
acid again the base is going to be
accepting a hydrogen ion so this is
acting as the acid this forms its
conjugate and this and I'll just and
quickly with the idea of something
that's amphoteric which is a molecule
can it can act as an acid or a base you
just saw some nice examples of that and
finally just one last definition for
acid bases and I don't want to well
we'll just put this up and then we'll
that's kind of the end so the final
definition the Lewis base donates a lone
pair whereas a Lewis acid accepts such
electrons
you